# p53_hotspots_structures

## The Identification and Analysis of Novel TP53 Hotspots and p53 Protein Structures

The p53 protein is a tumor suppressor tasked with arresting the cell cycle in the event of unregulated cell growth.  Since p53 is the most prominent tumor suppressor, its malfunctions are responsible for upwards of 50% of human cancers.  This critical protein is coded for by TP53, a gene on chromosome 17.  TP53 can have somatic (spontaneous) mutations, and/or germline mutations, which are inherited and found in every cell of the body.  Germline TP53 mutations are a key feature of Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS).  Some people exhibit TP53 mutations in only certain cells, which is known as mosaicism.
	The TP53 gene, and thus the p53 protein, has six regions: the first and second transactivation domains (TAD1 and TAD2), the proline rich domain (PR), the DNA-binding domain (DBD), the oligomerization domain (OD), and the C-terminus.  The DBD occupies 200 of the 393 codons that comprise TP53, and yet only 33% of mutations occur in the DBD.  Therefore, it is necessary to identify and analyze the mutations that occur outside of the DBD. Prior to this study, six mutation hotspots, all in the DBD, were the primary focus of research.  In this study, however, the IARC-NCI database is used to identify thousands of hotspots in all regions of the TP53 gene, across 76 distinct tissue types.  It was found that many hotspots are shared between somatic and germline cases, which indicates a similarity between these two seemingly distinct conditions.  A density heat map was produced for both somatic and germline mutations, and it reveals that somatic mutations concentrate in the DBD, whereas germline mutations cluster in the OD.  This explains the phenotypic differences between germline mutations, which may never pose an issue, and somatic mutations, which are only ever known if they cause oncogenesis.
p53 is a difficult protein to model in vitro because of its high instability, but using the novel software AlphaFold (Miridita et al., 2022), it becomes possible to make highly accurate in silico models of proteins.  This study marks the most accurate model of the wild type p53 protein to date, and the first time that any p53 mutant structure has been modeled across its isoforms.  In this study, 94,192 models of various p53 mutant proteins were created.  These structures were clustered, and the findings from this multiple structure alignment are promising because they show that thousands of proteins can share correctional drugs.  This project therefore lays the foundation for the design of both cancer preventing and cancer treating drugs.

The mapping between the identification number and the mutations is available in the free energy summary files.

For any questions or comments, please email:
camrynneches@gmail.com
HoyosD@mskcc.org
